---
path: "/posts/2015/11/node-js-on-raspberry-pi/"
date: "2015-11-28T07:10:03Z"
title: "Node.js on Raspberry Pi"
categories: aviation
excerpt: "For the past few weeks, I've felt a need to do something new - shake things up; that sort of thing...."
---

For the past few weeks, I've felt a need to do something new - shake things up; that sort of thing. I've also been yearning to learn a new programming language. I finally settled on learning node.js and to explore how it runs on a Raspberry Pi (RPi).

I'm the kind who likes to kick off a project in order to learn a new technology and so, after some thinking I decided on what my project was going to be.

# The Project

One of my big gripes with flight simulation is the absence of actual equipment that you can interact with to perform flight functions. While every self-respecting flight simulation set up includes the control yoke and rudder pedals, most of them do not include things like a radio console, or switches, that you can interact with during flight. The result is that the "pilot" ends up using his/her mouse to control the simulator's functions and that reduces the realism of the experience significantly.

The project I decided to work on was a **Radio and Switch Panel** for my flight simulator. I will describe the radio panel in more detail in a subsequent post and focus, instead, on actually setting up Node.js on the RPi in this post.

# Installing Node.js

There are two methods to installing node.js on the RPi:

* Using a pre-built <tt>.deb</tt> package.
* Installing from a tarball.

## Method 1: Using a .deb package

Pre-built <tt>.deb</tt> packages of the latest node.js are available at http://node-arm.herokuapp.com/. The steps to follow to install the latest LTS (4.2.1) version of node are:

1. Upgrade to the Debian Jessie release (the most recent Raspbian uses Jessie).
2. Download the latest node-arm node.js distribution. ``` $ wget http://node-arm.herokuapp.com/node_latest_armhf.deb ```
3. Install the <tt>.deb</tt> package: ``` $ sudo dpkg -i node_latest_armhf.deb ```
4. Test that your installation was successful: ``` $ node -v ```

You should see something like <tt>v4.2.1</tt> printed out on your console.

## Method 2: Install using a tarball

Binary tarballs of both the LTS (4.2.2), and the Stable (5.1.0) versions of node.js are available from the nodejs.org download site at https://nodejs.org/dist/v4.2.2 or https://nodejs.org/dist/v5.1.0

The steps to follow to install node.js from these distributions are:

1. Upgrade to the Debian Jessie release (the most recent Raspbian uses Jessie).
2. Determine which ARM processor version you have: ``` $ uname -mrs Linux 4.1.7-v7+ armv7l ``` Look for the phrase <tt>arm</tt> followed by a "<tt>vXX</tt>". In my case (the Raspberry Pi 2 Model B) the processor is an ARM v71 processor.
3. Download the appropriate tarball: ``` $ wget https://nodejs.org/dist/v4.2.2/node-v4.2.2-linux-armv7l.tar.gz ```
4. Install the distribution. I prefer to install it to <tt>/usr/local</tt>: ``` tar xvzf node-v4.2.2-linux-armv7l.tar.gz --directory /usr/local --strip-components=1 ``` The <tt>strip-components=1</tt> option in the command above strips the first entry from the directory structure in the tarball. If you omit this option, tar creates a directory called <tt>node-v4.2.2-linux-armv71</tt> inside </usr/local. That is not what we want. Hence, the use of the <tt>strip-components</tt> option.
5. Test your installation: ``` $ node -v v4.2.2 ```

That concludes our short discussion on how to install node.js on a Raspberry Pi.